---
title: "Reading Material"

date: 2020-10-06T08:49:31+00:00
lastmod: 2020-10-06T08:49:31+00:00
draft: false
images: []
menu:
  docs:
    parent: "other"
weight: 630
toc: true
---
This document contains reading material bolstering the estimation,
expert elicitation, quantitative certainty, scenario, and forecasting
subject matters that guide Simple Risk Measurement.

## Risk Language

This section includes reading that helps navigate the problems with
\"risk\" language, miscommunications and so forth.

### Defining Risk 

The language of risk is used in a variety of ways and shows up with
different intentions in practice.

 - [Hansson, Sven Ove, “Risk”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2018 Edition), Edward N. Zalta](https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2018/entries/risk/)
 - Boholm, M. , Möller, N. and Hansson, S. O. (2016), The Concepts of Risk, Safety, and Security: Applications in Everyday Language. Risk Analysis, 36: 320-338. doi:10.1111/risa.12464

### Specific Scenarios 

This section contains supporting reading for specific scenario building.
The \"Scenario\" is frequently used language in modern approaches to
risk analysis.


- [The Kaplan and Garrick Definition of Risk and its
Application to Managerial Decision Problems](https://nps.edu/documents/103424423/106950799/DRMI+Working+Paper+2011-3.pdf/bad99104-b54b-4646-9d92-45e16c2f80d8?t=1453930289000)
  - This form of the scenario is produced immediately from fault tree analyses and similar methods associated with engineering safety studies (i.e., nuclear reactor safety studies). Each scenario represents a unique concatenation of events. 
 - [Clarity Test](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clarity_test&oldid=847323771)
 - Decision Analysis: Practice and Promise. Ronald A. Howard. Management Science, Vol. 34, No. 6. (Jun., 1988), pp. 679-695.

### Hierarchy of Scenarios

The hierarchical relationship between specific future events. This is related by the third axiom of probability, that decomposition of a scenario should have "disjoint sets" or should be mutually exclusive from one another.

 - [Fault tree analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fault_tree_analysis#:~:text=Fault%20tree%20analysis%20(FTA)%20is,series%20of%20lower%2Dlevel%20events.&text=These%20system%20failure%20conditions%20and,in%20the%20functional%20hazard%20analysis.)
 - [Schneier on Security](https://www.schneier.com/academic/archives/1999/12/attack_trees.html)
 - [Fault Tree Handbook with AeroSpace Applications](https://elibrary.gsfc.nasa.gov/_assets/doclibBidder/tech_docs/25.%20NASA_Fault_Tree_Handbook_with_Aerospace_Applications%20-%20Copy.pdf)
 - [Amoroso, E. G. (1999). Fundamentals of computer security technology](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/179237)
 - [Swiderski, F., & Snyder, W. (2009). Threat Modeling](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/983226)
 - [Shostack, A. (2014). Threat modeling: Designing for security](https://www.amazon.com/Threat-Modeling-Designing-Adam-Shostack/dp/1118809998)


## Measurement / Approximation 

This section includes all references to, and arguments that measurements
are estimates. Generally speaking, everything we do is some form of
approximation, even when employing the use of measurement instruments.

 - [Measurement Uncertainty Antonio Possolo](https://www.nist.gov/itl/sed/topic-areas/measurement-uncertainty)
 - [Tal, Eran, “Measurement in Science”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy](<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2017/entries/measurement-science/)
 - [Hubbard, Douglas W., and Richard Seiersen. How to measure anything in cybersecurity risk](https://www.amazon.com/How-Measure-Anything-Cybersecurity-Risk/dp/1119085292/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=how+to+measure+anything+in+cybersecurity+risk&qid=1634578306&s=books&sr=1-1)
 - [A Turning Point for Humanity: Redefining the World’s Measurement System Robin Materese](https://www.nist.gov/si-redefinition/turning-point-humanity-redefining-worlds-measurement-system)
 - [Keeping the Standard Kilogram From Gaining Weight Is a Constant Struggle Nadia Drake](https://www.wired.com/2013/01/keeping-kilogram-constant/)
 - [Why scientists are redefining the kilogram](https://www.engadget.com/2017/10/24/why-scientists-are-redefining-the-kilogram/)
 - [Kibble balance](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kibble_balance&oldid=867616683)
 - [Evaluation of measurement data – Guide to the expression of uncertainty in measurement JCGM 100:2008 (GUM 1995 with minor corrections)](https://www.bipm.org/documents/20126/2071204/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf/cb0ef43f-baa5-11cf-3f85-4dcd86f77bd6)

## Expert Estimation

This section generally appeals to how experts can be queried for
quantitative data.

### Combining Expert Estimations

This describes the practice of gathering up forecast material and,
typically, averaging it together. Parimutuel Betting, Simple Averages,
Weighted Scores.

 - [Parimutuel betting](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parimutuel_betting&oldid=861927567)
 - [Probabilistic Forecasts and Reproducing Scoring Systems](https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/RM6299.html)

### Calibration of Experts

Also see [How to measure anything](#How to measure anything).

 - [Calibration Of Probabilities: The State Of the Art To 1980](http://www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA101986) 
 - [Calibration Of Probabilities: The State Of the Art](http://www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA033248)

### Humorous Examples

 - [Miyamoto’s Secret Hobby](https://kotaku.com/5381876/miyamotos-secret-hobby-measuring-stuff)
 - [Shigeru Miyamoto Guesses The Size of Random Objects (Jimmy Fallon)](https://youtu.be/DiUeuc7eOh0?t=16s)

## RAND 

RAND has been developing methods for expert estimation for decades,
described as DELPHI and Futures Methodology.

 - [Publications on Futures Methodologies: Delphi](https://www.rand.org/pardee/pubs/futures_method/delphi.html)
 - [Probabilistic Forecasts and Reproducing Scoring Systems](https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/RM6299.html)
 - [On the Epistemology of the Inexact Sciences](https://www.rand.org/pubs/reports/R353.html)
 - [An Experimental Application of the Delphi Method to the Use of Experts](https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/RM727z1.html)
 - [The Systematic Use of Expert Judgment in Operations Research](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P2795.html)
 - [Convergence of Expert Consensus Through Feedback](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P2973.html)
 - [Improving the Reliability of Estimates Obtained from a Consensus of Experts](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P2986.html)
 - [The Use of the Delphi Technique in Problems of Educational Innovations](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P3499.html)
 - [Analysis of the Future](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P3558.html)
 - [Delphi](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P3704.html)
 - [Systematic Use of Expert Opinions](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P3721.html)
 - [Delphi Process](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P3925.html)
 - [Experiments in Group Prediction](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P3820.html)
 - [Predicting the Future](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P3948.html)
 - [Delphi and Values](https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P4182.html)
 - [The Delphi Method](https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/RM5888.html)
 - [The DELPHI Method, II](https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/RM5957.html)
 - [The Delphi Method, III](https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/RM6115.html)
 - [The Delphi Method, IV](https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/RM6118.html)
 - [Experimental Assessment of Delphi Procedures with Group Value Judgments](https://www.rand.org/pubs/reports/R0612.html)
 - [Comparison of Group Judgment Techniques with Short-Range Predictions and Almanac Questions](https://www.rand.org/pubs/reports/R0678.html)
 - [Delphi Assessment](https://www.rand.org/pubs/reports/R1283.html)


## Expert Groups 

Also see [Tetlock](#tetlock).

 - Stan Kaplan, ‘Expert information’ versus ‘expert opinions’. Another approach to the problem of eliciting/ combining/using expert knowledge in PRA, Reliability Engineering & System Safety, Volume 35, Issue 1, 1992, Pages 61-72,
 - R.L. Keeney ; D. von Winterfeldt. Eliciting probabilities from experts in complex technical problems, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management ( Volume: 38 , Issue: 3 , Aug 1991 )

### IARPA

IARPA invests in quite a bit of predictive research and publishes
results often. They are also involved in forecasting tournaments.

 - [Teams Better Than Individuals at Intelligence Analysis, Research Finds. American Psychological Association.](https://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2015/01/intelligence-analysis.aspx)[*](https://www.iarpa.gov/index.php/newsroom/iarpa-in-the-news/2015/419-teams-better-than-individuals-at-intelligence-analysis-research-finds)

### Cooke\'s \"Classical Method\"

Often found in environmental risk (Volcanic, Earthquake) and others.

 - [Roger Cooke, Max Mendel, Wim Thijs, Calibration and information in expert resolution; a classical approach, Automatica, Volume 24, Issue 1, 1988, Pages 87-93, ISSN 0005-1098](http://rogermcooke.net/rogermcooke_files/Automatica%201988%20Cal%20Inf.pdf)
 - [Abigail R Colson, Roger M Cooke; Expert Elicitation: Using the Classical Model to Validate Experts’ Judgments, Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, Volume 12, Issue 1, 1 February 2018, Pages 113–132](https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rex022)
 - [A route to more tractable expert advice, Willy Aspinall.](http://www.rff.org/files/sharepoint/Documents/Features/294-295%20Opinion%20-%20Aspinall%20pr.pdf)
 - [Usgs Expert Elicitation Report](https://www.eeri.org/products-page/other-seminars-and-workshops/usgs-expert-elicitation-report/)
 - [Workshop on the ground motion models applied in the National Seismic Hazard Maps](https://earthquake.usgs.gov/static/lfs/nshm/workshops/GMPE2012/WED_AM01_Petersen.gmworkshop-berkeley-newsm.pdf)


Constructive critique of Cooke\'s method can be found here:

 - Bolger, F. and Rowe, G. (2015), The Aggregation of Expert Judgment: Do Good Things Come to Those Who Weight?. Risk Analysis, 35: 5-11. doi:10.1111/risa.12272

## Forecasting 

### Philip Tetlock 

Tetlock\'s research revolves around how experts who are untrained in
prediction are worse than random. He has since isolated those who are
stronger forecasters (Superforecasters) and is identifying their
qualities, especially around how someone a better forecaster, and how to
further improve them with teams.

### Meteorology

Maybe the oldest area of forecasting. Understanding the industrial
development of meteorology is a great rubric for how a predictive
industry is built over time. First, the theory. Then the infrastructure.
Then the operational practice of prediction, decision making, and
learning.

 - [Weather Analysis and Forecasting](https://www.ametsoc.org/ams/index.cfm/about-ams/ams-statements/statements-of-the-ams-in-force/weather-analysis-and-forecasting/)
 - [Timeline of meteorology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_meteorology)
 - [Bauer, Peter & Thorpe, Alan & Brunet, Gilbert. (2015). The quiet revolution of numerical weather prediction](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281516336_The_quiet_revolution_of_numerical_weather_prediction)


## Cognitive Error 

### Kahneman / Tversky

Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky offer observations into how fallible
the human mind is in the most common of circumstances. The
classification of System 1 and System 2 thinking is highly relevant to
this area of critical thinking around risk.

 - Kahneman, D. (2015). Thinking, fast and slow.


### Meehl / Dawes

Paul E. Meehl and Robyn Dawes work in prediction inspired a full fledged
assault on the credibility of expert prediction. Comprehensive findings
that mechanical statistical models beat experts at prediction.

 - [Meehl, P. E. (1966). Clinical versus Statistical Prediction](http://meehl.umn.edu/sites/g/files/pua1696/f/155dfm1993_0.pdf)

### N. Taleb

Taleb explores the limitations of our ability to understand randomness
and the nature of randomness. Preparation for inevitable surprise, and
the emergence of Black Swans, is Taleb\'s core message.

 - Taleb, N. N., Taleb, N. N., Taleb, N. N., Taleb, N. N., & Taleb, N. N. (2016). Incerto.


## Intelligence Analysis 

### Sherman Kent

Sherman Kent is considered a pioneer of intelligence analysis, and
brought probabilistic rigor into the National Intelligence Estimate.

 - [Sherman Kent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sherman_Kent)


His writing:

 - [Words Of Estimative Probability](https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/books-and-monographs/sherman-kent-and-the-board-of-national-estimates-collected-essays/6words.html)
 - [The Law and Custom of the National Intelligence Estimate](https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/books-and-monographs/sherman-kent-and-the-board-of-national-estimates-collected-essays/5law.html)
 - [The Making of an NIE](https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/books-and-monographs/sherman-kent-and-the-board-of-national-estimates-collected-essays/making.html)
 - [The Theory of Intelligence](https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/books-and-monographs/sherman-kent-and-the-board-of-national-estimates-collected-essays/the-theory-of-intelligence.html)

### Canadian Intelligence

There is research around Canada\'s application of modern intelligence
processing and its effectiveness. The basis of this is all
probabilistic.

 - [Canada Is Actually Pretty Good At Intelligence Forecasting, Ben Makuch](https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/kbz7gn/canadian-intelligence-agencies-are-actually-pretty-good-at-strategic-forecasting)
 - [Accuracy Of Forecasts in Strategic Intelligence, David Mandel-Alan Barnes](http://www.pnas.org/content/111/30/10984)

## Industry Examples

Industry examples where probabilistic risk assessment is at play:

 - [NASA Risk Management Handbook](https://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20120000033.pdf)
 - [EPA: Risk Assessment Forum White Paper: Probabilistic Risk Assessment Methods and Case Studies](https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-12/documents/raf-pra-white-paper-final.pdf)
 - [Probabilistic Risk Assessment Procedures Guide for Offshore Applications](https://www.bsee.gov/sites/bsee.gov/files/ProbalisticRiskAssessment%20%28PRA%29/bsee_pra_procedures_guide_-_10-26-17.pdf)
 - [Nuclear Probabilistic Risk Assessment](https://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/regulatory/risk-informed/pra.html)

This paper has a specifically useful overview of many different industry
approaches to safety.

 - [White Paper on Approaches to Safety Engineering](http://sunnyday.mit.edu/caib/concepts.pdf)
